---
author: Libro
year: 2023
title: Political Economy of Housing in Chile
source: Libro_2023_Political_Economy_of_Housing_in_Chile.pdf
---

# Political Economy of Housing in Chile

**Author:** Libro
**Year:** 2023
**Source:** Libro_2023_Political_Economy_of_Housing_in_Chile.pdf

---

## Content

### Page 2

Political Economy of Housing
in Chile
Through the lens of political economy, this book positions housing as a
key factor in understanding social inequality. It does so by drawing on rich
empirical evidence from the case of the Chilean housing market.
This book provides insights on the articulation between real estate
development, housing provision and social inequality based on applied
urban economics analyses that illustrate the contradictions of neoliberal
urbanism through the case of Chile. For neoliberal urbanism, the good city
is not equal for all, it is based on the principle of profitability and benefits
from segregation to make capital investment more efficient. The chapters of
this book expose how these processes are generated by a political system
that allows them rather than by the invisible hand of the market.
The book will be of interest to graduate students in urban studies,
urban planning, sociology and urban geography. It will also appeal
to decision-makers and also to actors in the real estate market seeking
to perfect the social benefits of their professional activities, aspiring to
generate more egalitarian and just cities.
Francisco Vergara-Perucich is an architect from Universidad Central
de Chile, Master in Architecture from Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile, and MSc Building and Urban Design in Development and Doctor
in Development Planning from The Bartlett Development Planning Unit,
University College London. He currently directs the Centro Producción del
Espacio at Universidad de las Américas.
Carlos Aguirre-Nuñez is a civil constructor from Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile and Master and PhD in Urban Management and Valuation
from Universidad Politécnica de Catalunya. He is currently Researcher of
Urban Studies at Universidad San Sebastián in Chile.

### Page 3

Felipe Encinas is an architect from Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile, MSc from the University of Nottingham in the UK, and PhD from
the Catholic University of Louvain in Belgium. He is currently Associate
Professor at the School of Architecture at Pontificia Universidad Católica
de Chile and a researcher at the Centre for Sustainable Urban Development
(CEDEUS).
Rodrigo Hidalgo-Dattwyler is a geographer from Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile and PhD in Human Geography from the University of
Barcelona. In 2014 he received the National Geography Prize awarded by
the Chilean Society of Geographical Sciences of Chile. He is currently head
of the PhD Programme in Geography at Pontificia Universidad Católica de
Chile and Director of the Revista de Geografía Norte Grande.
Ricardo Truffello is Geographer and Master in Geography and Geomatics
from the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile and PhD in Engineering
in Complex Systems from the Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez de Chile. He
currently directs the Observatorio de Ciudades at the Pontificia Universidad
Católica de Chile.
Felipe Ladrón de Guevara is an architect and holds a master’s degree in
Urban Planning from the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. He is
currently Assistant Professor at the School of Architecture and Head of the
Analysis and Quality Assurance Unit of the Faculty of Architecture, Design
and Urban Studies of Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile.

### Page 4

Routledge Studies in Urbanism and the City
Public Participation Process in Urban Planning
Evaluation Approaches of Fairness and Effectiveness Criteria
of Planning Advisory Committees
By Kamal Uddin, Bhuiyan Monwar Alam
Hegemony, Security Infrastructures and the Politics of Crime
Everyday Experiences in South Africa
Gideon van Riet
Marketplaces
Movements, Representations and Practices
Edited by Ceren Sezer and Rianne van Melik
Designing Healthy and Liveable Cities
Creating Sustainable Urban Regeneration
Marichela Sepe
The Political Economy of Land
Rent, Financialization and Resistance
Edited by Mika Hyötyläinen and Robert Beauregard
Future of the City Centre
Global Perspectives
Edited by Bob Giddings and Robert J Rogerson
Political Economy of Housing in Chile
Francisco Vergara-Perucich, Carlos Aguirre-Nuñez, Felipe Encinas, Rodrigo
Hidalgo-Dattwyler, Ricardo Truffello and Felipe Ladrón de Guevara
For more information about this series, please visit www.routledge.com/
Routledge-Studies-in-Urbanism-and-the-City/book-series/RSUC

### Page 6

Political Economy
of Housing in Chile
Francisco Vergara-Perucich,
Carlos Aguirre-Nuñez,
Felipe Encinas,
Rodrigo Hidalgo-Dattwyler,
Ricardo Truffello and
Felipe Ladrón de Guevara

### Page 7

First published 2023
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa
business
© 2023 Francisco Vergara-Perucich, Carlos Aguirre-Nuñez, Felipe
Encinas, Rodrigo Hidalgo-Dattwyler, Ricardo Truffello and Felipe
Ladrón de Guevara
The right of Francisco Vergara-Perucich, Carlos Aguirre-Nuñez,
Felipe Encinas, Rodrigo Hidalgo-Dattwyler, Ricardo Truffello and
Felipe Ladrón de Guevara to be identified as authors of this work
has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical,
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and
explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Vergara Perucich, Francisco, author. | Aguirre-Nuñez,
Carlos, author. | Encinas Pino, Felipe, author.
Title: Political economy of housing in Chile / Francisco Vergara-Perucich,
Carlos Aguirre-Nuñez, Felipe Encinas, Rodrigo Hidalgo-Dattwyler,
Ricardo Truffello and Felipe Ladrón de Guevara.
Description: First Edition. | New York, NY : Routledge, 2022. |
Series: Routledge studies in urbanism and the city | Includes
bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022043803 (print) | LCCN 2022043804 (ebook) |
ISBN 9781032391793 (hardback) | ISBN 9781032391823
(paperback) | ISBN 9781003348771 (ebook)
Subjects: LCSH: Housing—Chile. | Housing policy—Chile. | City
planning—Chile. | Capital investments—Chile. | Equality—Chile.
Classification: LCC HD7324.A3 V47 2022 (print) | LCC HD7324.
A3 (ebook) | DDC 363.5/5610983—dc23/eng/20221031
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022043803
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022043804
ISBN: 978-1-032-39179-3 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-39182-3 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-34877-1 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003348771
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Apex CoVantage, LLC

### Page 8

Contents
List of figures viii
List of tables ix
Preface xi
1 Introduction 1
2 Constitution and housing 7
3 Cost of living 12
4 House prices in Chile 22
a Hypothesis 1: due to soil scarcity 23
b Hypothesis 2: the problem is not housing, it is wages 28
c Hypothesis 3: due to regulations 33
d Hypothesis 4: the real estate market is imperfect 34
5 Real estate profitability 39
6 Housing and financialisation 46
7 Land and speculation 71
8 Pandemic and political economy of housing 80
9 Afterword: housing as political economy 99
References 106
Index 114

### Page 9

Figures
3.1 Evaluation of basic monthly expenditures as a percentage
of household income by decile. 18
4.1 Value of land purchased by real estate companies
measured in UF/m2. 27
4.2 Surface area of land purchased by real estate developers in
sectors close to the Metro (m2). 28
4.3 Graph showing the relationship between house prices
index (blue) and wages index (red). 31
6.1 Classification by levels of investification according to
census tract in Greater Santiago. 62
6.2 Areas of high investification, indicating sector of each
neighbourhood observed. 66
7.1 Index numbers (2008 = 1) of land price, high-rise
housing price, and price of construction materials for
34 communes of Greater Santiago. 73
7.2 Territorial Socio-material Indicator (ISMT) expressed in
the predominant socio-economic sector based on 2017
census information for the Santiago metropolitan area. 75
8.1 Metropolitan Area of Santiago by districts and socio-
economic groups. 82
8.2 Pearson’s correlation coefficients compare the components
of social determinants of health in housing and urban
development with the daily increase of cases per commune. 87
8.3 Metropolitan Area of Santiago weighted distance to
employment centres. 88
8.4 Scatter plot of communes according to predictability
values of the applied multiple linear regression model. 93

### Page 10

Tables
3.1 Evaluation of the cost of living by income decile at the
national level by regional capitals. Those that spend more
than 50% of income on fixed expenses are highlighted in grey. 19
4.1 Projection of housing potential to be developed by
commune according to available land. 26
4.2 Reduction of the poverty gap to USD 5.5 (2011, PPP)
between 2004 and 2015. 29
4.3 Ranking of reduction in income distribution (GINI) in
Latin America 2002–2017. 30
4.4 Adjusted autonomous household income at the national
level 2017, with data in UF. 30
4.5 Relationship between monthly wage income after taxes
and the rental price of a one-bedroom house in the city centre. 32
5.1 Baseline profitability of high-rise real estate projects. 40
5.2 Assessment of which socio-economic groups/communes
could pay a dividend according to the price of the
dwellings we have assessed. 41
5.3 Profit assessment updated to 2019 values measured in UF. 44
6.1 Aggregate 2018 net aggregate profits registered with the
Financial Marking Commission on partner banks of major
real estate companies. 52
6.2 Results of ordinary least squares analysis. Adjusted r2
factor = 0.41, model p-value less than 0.05. Flags indicate
the significant variables. 54
6.3 Summary of records of cases of investification by
communes in Greater Santiago. 58
6.4 Categories of investificators by communes, indicating
average rental price and dominant socio-economic group
in cases studied. 61

### Page 11

x Tables
6.5 Summary table of general characterisation of census tracts
with high investification cases. 63
6.6 Table of significant Pearson correlations between areas
with investification and urban variables. 64
6.7 Descriptive statistics for the exploration of the relationship
between rental price per square metre and levels of
investification by census tract. 67
7.1 Average values of indicators for the Santiago metropolitan
area, by predominant socio-economic sectors in the
census tract. 76
7.2 Number of building permits for new multi-family housing
by predominant socio-economic sectors in the census tract
for 2017–2018. 76
7.3 Number of building permits for new multi-family housing
in different municipalities by year for the period 2008–2018. 77
8.1 Principal component analysis applied to 20 variables
related to social determinants of health related to housing. 83
8.2 Results of multiple linear regression model. 90

### Page 12

Preface
This book articulates the problem of the housing crisis with the political
economy in order to advance the complexity of a social problem of great
global relevance, broadening its purely operational scope, which refers to
the material production of housing. The aim of the book is to discuss the
scope of housing in terms of the integral planning of the state, the nation and
economic relations. Housing is a result of political action, and as such, its
scope goes far beyond architects, planners or urban planners to incorporate
actors as diverse as investors in stock exchanges to presidents of a central
bank. If the housing problem has not found lasting solutions in much of the
world, it may be because of its prioritisation, as a problem of public interest
is mainly sectoral rather than a comprehensive matter affecting the many.
In our view, the housing problem cannot be solved only with design, poli-
tics or economics, but with all of them at the same time, interrelated, and
by incorporating the knowledge of other disciplinary fields ranging from
anthropology to social work. If space is a result of social relations, housing
is possibly the most social of all spaces.
The book we present is the result of years of joint work by a group of
authors in different academic instances. Our reflections are situated in
Chile, where we have been part of a real struggle to broaden the decision-
making frameworks that affect the process of producing decent housing for
the population. In our work as researchers, we often come across findings
that deserve to be heard by decision-makers. However, neither the findings
nor the researchers themselves have the same information dissemination
apparatus as the actors who have vested interests in the field. A scientific
article does not carry the same weight as several press releases in the eyes
of decision-makers, and often, having an open platform in the media allows
scientific findings to be disqualified without counterweight. On the other
hand, researchers tend to fall into the innocence of believing that findings
alone, backed by science, should have enough weight of their own to impute
the arguments of an industry that defends its business. This permissive

### Page 13

xii Preface
innocence often allows the findings to fail to influence housing policy,
which is our focus of study. But we have learned from both failures and
achievements. One of the main lessons learned is that the housing problem
is a case of political economy, according to a study on inequality that arises
from productive and commercial relations with the state and society. This
book seeks, precisely, to share the process that led to this learning.
The authors have gathered findings that allow us to support that the hous-
ing problem is a matter of political economy. We have reported how energy
poverty is reflected in housing design and production processes, emphasis-
ing that the real estate industry needs to adapt its ways of producing for
the urgencies of climate change. We have also raised the importance of
improving the mechanisms for measuring socio-territorial realities, so that
the authorities understand the future value of this data in designing public
policies. We have also produced evidence that indicates the contradictions
of the housing market and how its results are unattainable for many house-
holds that do not have secure access to housing. Framing these discussions
in a political economy book allows us to broadly share how our research
findings align with a broader discussion of structural inequality in neolib-
eralised nations.
In 2020, we launched a book in Chile that served as a general basis for this
book. At that time, the discussion we developed was much more focused on
the local problem. With the pandemic years of the new coronavirus and its
consequent social crisis, we saw how our findings could be useful in other
nations, where the ways of understanding the housing problem could be
aligned with the issues that arise in Chile. To this, we added that Chile is a
global outlier, being the first nation where a neoliberal political economy
model was imposed in 1975 under the dictatorial regime of Augusto Pino-
chet, advised by the Chicago Boys and Milton Friedman himself. Chile was
the guinea pig for the neoliberal experiment that was later implemented in a
lot of places around the world. Therefore, as an atypical case of neoliberal-
ism, almost caricatured, the lessons that emerge from its contradictions can
be useful in other nations where neoliberalism is also in crisis. In this book,
we share applicable and replicable methodological approaches with data
that can be used in other countries to compare experiences and review the
scope of the political economy of housing in each specific local reality. In
addition, in the 2020 book, we knew little of the transcendental effects that
the social explosion in Chile would have, and this book did not know the
importance the new coronavirus would have in revealing the importance of
housing but from the disciplines of public health, thereby broadening the
scope of the problem that at that time seemed very sectoral, especially in
terms of urban planning disciplines.

### Page 14

Preface xiii
We have tried to develop a didactic book, avoiding technicalities and
focusing on how the results speak to the problem of inequality from the
analysis of housing. In essence, this is a book that uses housing to explain
one of the possible origins of inequality: the fair distribution of territory and
the absence of the right to the city. As we write this book, Chile is debating
the approval of a new Political Constitution of the Republic, drafted for the
first time in history by a democratically elected, parity-based and socially
diverse collegiate body. This new constitutional text enshrines the right to
housing and the right to the city. If this constitution is implemented, this
book could serve to identify factors in the housing production process that
facilitate the reproduction of inequality in order to generate solutions from
the new rights-based approach.

### Page 16

1 Introduction
The production and reproduction of space are profoundly ideological/politi-
cal events. Space is not merely an inert substance deployed by designers.
Overall, urban planning adjudicates the process as the agent of state inter-
ventionism, on behalf of social reproduction, capital accumulation and the
circulation of commodities. Therefore, it is centrally involved in the man-
agement of a key factor of production, namely land (and, as such, in the
generation of land rent, profit and surplus value).
Alexander Cuthbert, 20111
The process of urban development is profoundly ideological. Dressing up
the disciplines dedicated to the city in scientific suits, with an aspiration to
develop results in an apolitical, ideology-free way, is a mistake of origin. It
fails to recognise that space, and especially the city, is produced politically.
Disputes, impositions, violence, community organisation, resistance and
agreements shape-built space. Under this premise, in our understanding,
there is no technocracy without ideologies, given that technique is always
inscribed in epistemological frameworks that generate interpretations
marked by the authors of each design, originating in specific ontological
positions. In other words, subjectivity is also part of the design of the meth-
ods used in urban studies. This may be a truism in some parts of the world,
where science is indeed closer to decision-makers, but we who write from
South America know that it is a necessary distinction. So, urbanism, like
many other disciplinary fields, allows us to justify approaches to urban pro-
ductive processes in search of generating convictions and certainties about
how to operate in the city, but it serves specific purposes and, therefore, has
a strong ideological component at its root. In Chile, the basic ideology of
urban planning since its neoliberalisation began in 1976 (with the liberalisa-
tion of taxes on construction production processes) is to seek mechanisms
that validate decision-making based on the profitability (economic and
DOI: 10.4324/9781003348771-1

### Page 17

2 Introduction
social) of urban transformations. However, this is not exclusive to Chile,
although it is one of the few places in the world where the phenomenon has
been widely studied over 40 years and in the case of Santiago, it is more
visible and therefore more interesting to analyse. Studying the processes
of housing production in Chile is not so different from studying its socio-
economic history. Peggy Deamer puts it clearly: Since the production of
architecture and cities requires immense amounts of capital that articulate
the public, the private and the social, the history of cities is in large part the
history of capitalism itself.2 Similarly, we will understand the neoliberal
model in the sense proposed by David Harvey: Incubated during the crisis
of the 1970s, masked under a “thick layer of rhetoric about individual free-
dom, personal responsibility, the virtues of privatisation, free markets and
free trade”, and which in practice legitimised “draconian policies aimed at
restoring and consolidating the power of the capitalist class”.3
It is for this reason that the book we present here is so relevant for the
interpretation of history in Chile, given that it uses data and records from
2019, a key year in setting a different course from the turbo-capitalism
to which we have been exposed since 1975. It is an important date, and
although we do not know the future yet, the data indicate that many things
will change from now on, including the political economy of housing and
the disciplinary ethics that shape it. Referring to the national contingency,
Sebastian Edwards, a renowned academic at the University of California
(UCLA), said, “the neoliberal experiment is completely dead”.4
In the early hours of Friday 15 November 2019, Congress signed
the agreement to initiate a new constituent process to be plebiscite in
April 2020. This book was completed on the same Friday. In seeking to
make the ideology of this text transparent, we establish that we are critical
of the processes that generate socio-spatial inequality and seek to under-
stand how these end up benefiting a few at the expense of many others.
Thus, we are inclined towards an urban ontology influenced by spatial jus-
tice thinking derived from the critical urbanism advocated by Jane Jacobs,
Susan Fainstein, David Harvey, Raquel Rolnik and mostly, the principles
of Henri Lefebvre’s Right to the City. However, we also believe that con-
tradictions underlie the very methodologies of neoliberal urbanism that
attempt to justify its decision-making. It is for this reason that, from criti-
cal urbanism as an interpretative framework, we use the tools of neoliberal
urbanism to study its conditions and review, with its own methods of vali-
dation, the fissures that emerge and materialise in conflictive socio-spatial
phenomena. Above all, as a major ethical framework, we try to situate
ourselves within the charter of human rights as a referential platform for
our reflections. We believe that housing needs special attention from this
perspective in the Chilean context.

### Page 18

Introduction 3
Housing is a human right. It sounds like a slogan, but there is no chance
of a good life without access to safe, healthy, well-designed and good qual-
ity housing. Homelessness is the lack of a bed, a bathroom, a kitchen, access
to drinking water, shelter, privacy—the material certainty of the old saying
“having somewhere to drop dead”. The horrifying thing is that currently in
Chile, without money, there is nowhere to drop dead. Moreover, legisla-
tively, it is a human right because it is suggested by the United Nations, the
planetary body in charge of safeguarding respect for human rights. In this
respect, Leilani Farha, special rapporteur on housing for this organisation,
after learning about the Chilean reality in terms of the right to housing, rec-
ommended that the State of Chile “redouble its efforts to diversify the hous-
ing model, ensuring that the creation of housing does not depend solely on
private developers and ensure that families are not obliged to obtain a mort-
gage”.5 This accurate recommendation highlights one of the main problems
facing the nation in ensuring the human right to housing: the privatisation
of its allocation mechanisms and financialisation.
Housing in Chile is a private property rather than a right, and as such,
it is traded commercially. In the current conditions of financialisation of
everyday life, housing, as private property, has become a long-term fixed
income financial asset. In other words, housing is used to invest and gener-
ate capital as its value increases over time. This financial function of hous-
ing is displacing its use function—today it is more important that housing is
profitable than it is of good quality. An example of this is how the elemental
proposal was interpreted to privilege the location of social housing and thus
maximise resources to obtain better land instead of better housing.6 While
the architectural world paid a lot of attention to the design driven by the
versatile skills of the elemental team, the decision-makers valued more that
the design be in more central urban sectors to improve added value. In other
words, they did not care as much about liveability as they did about its value
increasing over time. This discourse permeated into other modes of urban
production, and nowadays, the construction of 17 m2 flats—known as nano-
apartments—is beginning to be validated as a possibility to live close to the
centre and, therefore, with good added value. This is aberrant, but it follows
the neoliberal logic of Homo economicus, in which human decisions are
assumed to be based on economic views of problems and the decisions are
rational. Unfortunately, while the process of acquiring a home can indeed
be approached from an economic perspective, everyday life does not fit into
such calculations. Its fundamental social role means that housing is not a
matter for architects interested in its functionality or economists interested
in its profitability, but is a problem that concerns all social strata, including
health—ensured by an adequate design to avoid respiratory diseases—so
that alienation processes do not occur due to models of housing that are not

### Page 19

4 Introduction
very inclusive to its technical, sustainable, legislative and political quali-
ties, among many other aspects in which housing is key. However, in the
national context—which is far from idealism—we have to analyse housing
as an economic element, understand its complexity, and with it, deconstruct
it to see if its productive processes and uses can be humanised. This is why
we speak of the political economy of housing.
For David Ricardo, one of the fathers of political economy, economic
relations are in themselves decisional and therefore, they fulfil a political
function. This is why it is so relevant when it comes to understanding pro-
ductive processes as well as such material aspects such as the formation of
prices, rents, and values. For his part, Karl Marx states that value and price
are formed as a consequence of a set of social relations that develop accord-
ing to what the productive structures of society allow, which are created
and formed according to the interests of the capitalist or, in this case, of the
actors in the productive cycle with the greatest decision-making power. In
Chile, it would be equivalent to what Gabriel Salazar has called the “civil
political class” and the “speculative mercantile class”.7 So, to define the
intellectual position from which this work is developed, we will understand
political economy as the study of production and exchange in relation to
legislative aspects, market, government, state and consumers (once citi-
zens) from a critical perspective of income distribution, political-economic
opportunities and aspects related to wealth. The political economy of hous-
ing is the study of the factors that explain its accessibility or inaccessibil-
ity, seeking to ensure its correct allocation to households from the market,
the state and the tools provided by public policy. In the particular case of
Chile, this study of the political economy of housing stems from the crisis
of access that the country is experiencing. Although it is an issue that has
been around for some time in academic circles, it gained particular notoriety
a few months ago when it was mentioned publicly by the Chilean Chamber
of Construction (Cámara Chilena de la Construcción). Indeed, in a meeting
before authorities and businessmen—including the President of the Repub-
lic, Sebastián Piñera—the president of the trade union organisation, Patricio
Donoso, declared, “I am not exaggerating if I say that we are facing a crisis
of access to housing that is soon to turn into a social crisis”.8 And then,
the social outburst that began on 18 October 2019 only confirmed it, since
one of its declared causes was the high cost of living, where housing is the
heaviest element.
The book we present here compiles a set of in-depth studies on the politi-
cal economy of housing, trying to explain why it has become inaccessible
and testing some ways to reverse this condition. Part of these chapters and
their conclusions have already been presented in articles in specialised jour-
nals, book chapters and articles published in the prestigious Chilean media

### Page 20

Introduction 5
called CIPER (Centro de Investigación Periodística). This academic pro-
duction has been developed within the Centro de Producción del Espacio
of the Universidad de Las Américas and the Centro de Desarrollo Urbano
Sustentable (CEDEUS) of the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile.
Thus, the studies presented in this text seek to dispute with scientifically
developed data that the housing market in Chile is imperfect and requires
substantial improvements in order to advance towards the human right to
housing.
The first chapter of the book discusses the context of housing in Chile,
marked by its Political Constitution, where housing as such is not pre-
sent in the text and it is treated only as private property. The second part
explores the relationship between the cost of living in Chile’s cities and
household income—which is largely the justification for this study—given
that housing is the most significant household expense and has now become
unaffordable for large portions of the population. A third part sets out the
arguments most commonly used to explain high housing prices by academ-
ics and the business community. The fourth part puts forward one of our
hypotheses based on concrete data: housing is unaffordable because it has
become a business that aims at profitability rather than habitability. The
fifth part explores this idea further and discusses how housing has become
a long-term fixed income financial asset, more profitable than other finan-
cial instruments and tremendously competitive for investors, thus breaking
its use value and more strongly embracing its exchange value as the main
criterion when deciding where to invest in housing and how to design it. In
the sixth part, we extend a hypothesis on the importance of location as a key
factor in defining housing prices and how this impacts social segregation.
Towards the end, we propose a series of measures based on the necessary
recognition of the social role of urban land and the importance of having
an active state system of housing provision, along with strict regulatory
frameworks for private residence, ensuring its fair price and high quality.
This last part is based on international cases that could be applied in Chile.
Finally, we develop a set of reflections and conclusions that seek to feed the
upcoming debate on a new Constitution and the opportunities that open up
from this space to rethink our cities.
Notes
1 Cuthbert, Alexander R Cuthbert, Understanding Cities: Method in Urban Design
(London: Routledge, 2011), 78.
2 Deamer, Peggy Deamer, Architecture and capitalism: 1845 to the present, 2013,
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203499023.
3 Harvey, David. The Enigma of Capital and the Crises of Capitalism (Madrid:
Ediciones Akal S. A, 2012).

### Page 21

6 Introduction
4 Edwards, Sebastián. The Reality of Inequality and Its Perception: Chile’s
Paradox Explained. Pro-Market, 19 November 2019. https://promarket.org/
the-reality-of-inequality-and-its-perception-chiles-paradox-explained/
5 Farha, Leilani. 2017. Report of the Special Rapporteur on Adequate Housing as
a Component of the Right to an Adequate Standard of Living, and on the Right
to Nondiscrimination in this Context, on her Mission to Chile. New York: United
Nations.
6 A reflection on this extra-disciplinary understanding is developed by journal-
ist Hector Cossio in El Mostrador (http://shorturl.at/vCUW1) and the Hyatt
Foundation itself in the statement of the arguments for awarding Aravena the
Pritzker Prize: So-called incremental housing allows social housing to be
built on land that is more expensive but closer to economic opportunities and
gives residents a sense of personal investment. At: www.pritzkerprize.com/
announcement-ale-jan-dro-ara-ve-na.
7 Salazar, Gabriel Salazar, La enervante levedad historica de la clase politica civil
(Chile 1900–1973) (Santiago: Debate, 2015); Gabriel Salazar, Historia de la acu-
mulación capitalista en Chile (apuntes de clases) (Santiago: LOM Ediciones,
2003).
8 Pulse. Construcción advierte riesgo de crisis social por creciente costo de las
viviendas. La Tercera Pulso, 10 May 2019.

### Page 22

References
A reflection on this extra-disciplinary understanding is developed by journalist
Hector Cossio in El Mostrador (http://shorturl.at/vCUW1) and the Hyatt Foundation
itself in the statement of the arguments for awarding Aravena the Pritzker Prize:
So-called incremental housing allows social housing to be built on land that is more
expensive but closer to economic opportunities and gives residents a sense of
personal investment. At: www.pritzkerprize.com/announcement-ale-jan-dro-ara-ve-
n a.
A. Berni et al., Eect of Vascular Risk Factors on Increase in Carotid and Femoral
Intima-Media Thickness. Identification of a Risk Scale, Atherosclerosis 216, no. 1
( 2011): 109–14.
Aalbers, Manuel B. and Anne Haila , ‘The Financialization of Housing: A Political
Economy Approach’, Urban Studies (2018),
h ttps://doi.org/10.1177/0042098018759251.
Alejandra Rasse , Segregación residencial socioeconómica y desigualdad en las
c iudades chilenas, Serie Documentos de Trabajo PNUD 4 (2016);
Amoako, Clifford Amoako y Emmanuel Frimpong Boamah, Build as You Earn and
Learn: Informal Urbanism and Incremental Housing Financing in Kumasi, Ghana,
Journal of Housing and the Built Environment 32, no. 3 (2017): 429–48,
h ttps://doi.org/10.1007/s10901-016-9519-0.
A tria, Fernando , El otro modelo (Santiago: Random House Monda- dori, (2013).
Ball, Michael , Housing Policy and Economic Power: The Political Economy of
O wner Occupation UP 828 (London and New York: Methuen, (1983).
Bladen, Vincent W. , An Introduction to Political Economy, 2016.
w ww.degruyter.com/doi/book/10.3138/9781442632103.
Boano, Camillo y Francisco Vergara-Perucich, Neoliberalism and Urban
D evelopment in Latin America (London and New York: Routledge, (2017).
Bohoslavsky, Juan Pablo , Fernandez, Karinna , Smart, Sebastian (ed). Economic
Complicity with the Chilean Dictator-ship: an Unequal Country by Force (Santiago:
L OM Ediciones, 2019).
Bourdieu, Pierre . Las estructuras sociales de la economía (Buenos Aires:
M anantial Editorial, (2001).
Bourdieu, Pierre . The Social Structures of the Economy, (Cambridge: Polity Press,
( 2005).
Brenner, Neil , Peter Marcuse , and Margit Mayer (ed), Cities for People, Not for
P rofit (New York and Oxon: Routledge, 2012).
Burgos, Soledad Burgos et al., Residential typologies in Chilean irregular
settlements with precarious housing conditions, Revista Panameri-cana de Salud
P ublica 29, no 1 (2011): 32–40, https://dx.doi.org/S1020-49892011000100005.
Caitlin Buckle et al., Marginal Housing during COVID-19, AHURI Final Report, no
3 48 (2020): 1–55, https://doi.org/10.18408/ahuri7325501.
Camila Cociña , Habitar desigualdades: Politicas urbanas y el despliegue de la
vida en Bajos de Mena, Serie Documentos de Trabajo PNUD-Desigualdad, n.
2 016/05 (2016): 1–21.
Cattaneo Pineda, Rodrigo . Real Estate Investment Funds and Private Housing
Production in Santiago de Chile: A New Step Towards the Financialisation of the
C ity? EURE (Santiago) 37, no. 112 (2011): 5–22.
CChC. Indicators . Information Centre, 2019. www.cchc.cl/centro-de-
i nformacion/indicadores/
Cédric Durand , Fictitious Capital. How Finance Is Appropriating Our Future.
( London and New York: Verso Books, (2017).
Chang, Ha-joon , 23 Things They Don’t Tell You about Capitalism (London:
Penguin, (2011), 23.

### Page 23

Chovar, Alejandra , and H. Salgado . “¿Cuánto influyen las tarjetas de crédito y los
créditos hipotecarios en el sobre endeudamiento de los hogares en chile.” Banco
Central de Chile, Vol. 8 (2010). Available at: https://www.bcentral.cl/docu-
ments/33528/133585/bcch_archivo_140212_es.pdf/16a59094-1e07-9f2e-aa2b-
6 3c4aca06f4b?t=1573288203160 (accessed 22-11-2022)
Comité Hábitat y Vivienda , Dignidad Humana en el Territorio y la Ciudad
( Santiago: Lom Ediciones, (2016).
Contreras, Dante & Ffrench-Davis, Ricardo . «Policy Regimes, Inequality, Poverty
and Growth: The Chilean Experience, 1973–2010», Unu-Wider, 2012,
w ww.wider.unu.edu/stc/repec/pdfs/wp2012/WP2012-004.pdf.
Corburn, Jason , ‘Slum Health: Arresting COVID-19 and Improving Well-Being in
Urban Informal Settlements’, Journal of Urban Health (2020),
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11524-020-00438-6; Julio D. Dávila , ‘Covid-19, Urban
Mobility and Social Equity’, DPU Blog, 2020,
https://blogs.ucl.ac.uk/dpublog/2020/05/04/covid-19-urban-mobility-and-social-
e quity/.
Correa-Parra, Juan , José-Francisco Vergara-Perucich , y Carlos Aguirre-Núñez ,
Towards a Walkable City: Principal Component Analysis for Defining Sub-
c entralities in the Santiago Metropolitan Area, Land 9, no. 11 (2020): 1–22.
Cortés, Yasna , and Victor Iturra , ‘Market versus Public Provision of Local Goods:
An Analysis of Amenity Capitalization within the Metropolitan Region of Santiago
d e Chile’, Cities 2019, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2019.01.015.
Cuthbert, Alexander R , Understanding Cities: Method in Urban Design (London:
R outledge, (2011).
Cuthbert, Alexander R. Understanding Cities: Method in Urban Design. London:
R outledge, 2011.
Daher, Antonio . Territorios de la financiarización urbana y de las crisis
inmobiliarias. Rev. geogr. Norte Gd. [online]. 2013, n.56, pp.7–30.
h ttp://dx.doi.org/10.4067/S0718-34022013000300002.
Deamer, Peggy Deamer , Architecture and capitalism: 1845 to the present,
( London: Routledge, (2013).
Donoso, F. and Sabatini, F. Santiago: Real Estate Company Buys Land. EURE
M agazine 7, no. 9 (1980).
Donoso, Francisco Donoso y Francisco Sabatini , Santiago: empresa inmobiliaria
compra terrenos, EURE: Revista Latinoamericana de Estudios urbanos y
T erritoriales 7, no. 20 (1980): 25–51.
Durán, G. and Kremerman, M. Low wages in Chile, 2019. www.fundacionsol.cl/wp-
c ontent/uploads/2019/04/Salarios-al-Li%CC%81mite-2017-NV2-1.pdf
D ussel, Enrique , ‘16 Tesis de Economía Política’, 2014, 18.
Edwards, Sebastián . The Reality of Inequality and Its Perception: Chile’s Paradox
Explained. Pro-Market, 19 November 2019. https://promarket.org/the-reality-of-
i nequality-and-its-perception-chiles-paradox-explained/
Emilie Alirol et al., Urbanisation and Infectious Diseases in a Globalised World, The
Lancet Infectious Diseases 11, no. 2 (2011): 131–41,
h ttps://doi.org/10.1016/S1473-3099(10)70223-1.
Encinas, Felipe & Carlos Aguirre , Sustentabilidad y mercado: aproximaciones
desde la promoción inmobiliaria, ACE: Architecture, City and Environment, 2017,
https://doi.org/10.5821/ace.12.35.5141; Felipe Encinas et al., Energy-Ecient Real
Estate or How It Is Perceived by Potential Homebuyers in Four Latin American
Countries, Sustainability 11, no. 13 (2019): 3531,
h ttps://doi.org/10.3390/su11133531.
Encinas, Felipe et al., Speculation, Land Rent, and the Neoliberal City. Or Why
Free Market is Not Enough, Revista ARQ 1, no. 102 (2019): 2–15.

### Page 24

Encinas, Felipe , Marmolejo-Duarte, Carlos , Wagemann, Elizabeth and Aguirre,
Carlos . Energy-Ecient Real Estate or How It Is Perceived by Potential Home-
buyers in Four Latin American Countries. Sustainability 11, no. 13 (2019): 3531.
E n: https://doi.org/10.3390/su11133531.
Farha, Leilani . 2017. Report of the Special Rapporteur on Adequate Housing as a
Component of the Right to an Adequate Standard of Living, and on the Right to
Nondiscrimination in this Context, on her Mission to Chile. New York: United
N ations.
Felipe Yaluff , Los Secretos de La Inversión Inmobiliaria (Santiago: Editorial Un
N uevo Día, (2016).
Figueroa, Cristhian Martínez et al., Creating Inequality in Accessibility: The
Relationships between Public Transport and Social Housing Policy in Deprived
Areas of Santiago de Chile, Journal of Transport Geography (2017): 0–1,
h ttps://doi. org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2017.09.006
Flores, Pablo, Campamentos, la cara visible de la exclusión, Radio Universidad de
Chile , 2018, http://radio.uchile.cl/2017/10/23/aumento-de-campamentos-la-cara-
visible-de-la-exclusion-habitacional/; Francisco Vergara-perucich y Camillo Boano,
El precio por el derecho a la ciudad ante el auge de campamentos en Chile The
rise of urban slums in Chile, Revista AUS 26 (2018): 51–57,
h ttps://doi.org/10.4206/aus.2019.n26-09.
Forchuk, Cheryl , Kevin Dickins , y Deborah J. Corring , Social Determinants of
Health: Housing and Income, Healthcare Quarterly (Toronto, Ont.) 18 (2016):
2 7–31, https://doi.org/10.12927/hcq.2016.24479.
Fuller, Gregory W. The Political Economy of Housing Financialization, Comparative
P olitical Economy (Newcastle upon Tyne: Agenda Publishing, (2019).
Gasic, Ivo Gasic , Inversiones e intermediaciones financieras en el mercado del
suelo urbano. Principales hallazgos a partir del estudio de transacciones
deterrenos en Santiago de Chile, 2010–2015, Eure 44, no 133 (2018): 29–50,
h ttps://doi.org/10.4067/s0250-71612018000300029.
Gil McCawley, Diego , The Political Economy of Land Use Governance in San-
tiago, Chile and Its Implications for Class-Based Segregation, SSRN 47, no 1
( 2012): 119–64, https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2144538.
Giorgio Agamben , ‘Monólogo Del Virus’, Lundimatin, 27 March 2020,
h ttps://lundi.am/Monologo-del-Virus-2853.
Greene, Ricardo , Lucía de Abrantes, y Luciana Trimano, Nos/otros: Fantasías
geográficas, fricciones y desengaños, ARQ (Santiago), n. 106 (2020): 92–103,
h ttps://doi.org/10.4067/S0717-69962020000300092
Gregory D. Andranovich and Gerry Riposa , Doing Urban Research (Thousand
O aks: SAGE Publications, (1993).
Guiloff Titiun, M. Regulatory Expropriation: An Impertinent Doctrine to Control the
Imposition of Limits to the Right to Private Property in the Chilean Constitution. Ius
e t Praxis 2, no. 2 (2018): 621–648.
Harberger, Arnold Harberger , Notas sobre los problemas de vivienda y planifi-
c ación de la ciudad, Revista AUCA 37, no. 1 (1979): 39–41.
Harvey, David . Seventeen Contradictions and the End of Capitalism, (Oxford:
O xford University Press, (2014).
Harvey, David . The Enigma of Capital and the Crises of Capitalism (Madrid:
E diciones Akal S. A, (2012).
Hays, J. Epidemics and Pandemics. Their Impacts on Human History (Santa
B arbara, CA, Denver, Oxford: ABC Clio, (2005).
H enri Lefebvre , La Revolución Urbana (Alianza Editorial, 1972), Madrid.
Hidalgo Dattwyler, R. A. ; Paulsen Bilbao, A. G. and Santana Rivas, L. D.
Subsidiary Neoliberalism and the Search for Justice and Equality in Access to

### Page 25

Social Housing: The Case of Santiago de Chile (1970–2015). Andamios 13, no. 32
( 2016): 57–81.
Hidalgo Dattwyler, Rodrigo , Voltaire Christian Alvarado Peterson , y Daniel
Santana Rivas , La espacialidad neoliberal de la producción de vivienda social en
las áreas metropolitanas de Valparaíso y Santiago (1990–2014):¿hacia la
construcción idelógica de un rostro humano?, Cadernos Metrópole 19, no. 39
( 2017): 513–35, https://doi.org/10.1590/2236-9996.2017-3907
Hidalgo Dattwyler , Rodrigo Hidalgo Dattwyler , Alvarado Peterson Christian
Voltaire , y Daniel Santana Rivas , La espacialidad neoliberal de la producción de
vivienda social en las áreas metropolitanas de Valparaíso y Santiago (1990–2014):
¿hacia la construcción idelógica de un rostro humano?, Cadernos Metrópole 19,
n o. 39 (2017): 513–35.
Hidalgo-Dattwyler, Rodrigo , ¿Se acabó el suelo en la gran ciudad?: Las nuevas
periferias metropolitanas de la vivienda social en Santiago de Chile, EURE
(Santiago) 33, no. 98 (2007): 57–75. https://doi.org/10.4067/S0250-
7 1612007000100004.
Hidalgo-Dattwyler, Rodrigo , La Vivienda Social En Chile y La Construcción Del
E spacio Urbano En El Santiago Del Siglo XX (Santiago: RIL Editores, (2019).
Hidalgo-Dattwyler, Rodrigo , La Vivienda Social En Chile y La Construcción Del
E spacio Urbano En El Santiago Del Siglo XX (Santiago: RIL Editores, (2019).
Hulchanski, J. David . The Concept of Housing Aordability: Six Contemporary Uses
of the Expenditure to Income Ratio, Housing Studies 10, no. 4 (1995),
h ttps://doi.org/10.1080/02673039508720833
Hulse, Kath & Margaret Reynolds , Investification: Financialisation of housing
markets and persistence of suburban socio-economic disadvantage, Urban Studies
5 5, n. 8 (2018): 1655–71, https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098017734995.
I ngevec , Memoria Anual 2018, SVS (Santiago: Ingevec, (2018), 68.
Irarrazaval, Felipe , La no tan loca geografía del COVID 19 en Chile, Journal of
L atin American Geography (2020): 1–5.
Johns Hopkins University , ‘World Trends’, COVID-19 Dashboard by the Center for
Systems Science and Engineering (CSSE) at Johns Hopkins University (JHU),
2 020, https://coronavirus.jhu.edu/map.html.
Kakwani, Nanak Kakwani y Robert J. Hill , Economic Theory of Spatial Cost of
Living Indices with Application to Thailand, Journal of Public Economics 86, no. 1
( 2002): 71–97, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0047-2727(00)00174-2.
Kath Hulse and Margaret Reynolds , ‘Investification: Financialisation of Housing
Markets and Persistence of Suburban Socio-Economic Disadvantage’, Urban
S tudies 55, no. 8 (2018): 1655, https://doi.org/10.1177/0042098017734995.
Kjellstrom, Tord , y Susan Mercado , Towards Action on Social Determinants for
Health Equity in Urban Settings, Environment and Urbanization 20, no. 2 (2008):
5 38, https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247808096128.
Lauren A. Taylor et al., Leveraging the Social Determinants of Health: What
W orks?, PLoS ONE 11, no. 8 (2016): 1–20.
L awner, Miguel Lawner , ¿Qué hacer? (Santiago: Carta personal, (2019).
Lawson, Andrew B. , Handbook of Spatial Epidemiology (Boca Raton:CRC Press,
T aylor and Francis Group, 2016).
Le Corbusier , Towards a New Architecture, Towards a New Architecture (New
Y ork: Dover Publicat, (1986), https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-85139-652-1.50006-8.
L efebvre, Henri , La producción del espacio (Madrid: Captian Swing, (2013)
L efebvre, Henri , La Révolution Urbaine (Paris: Gallimard, (1970).
Leilani Farha , Report of the Special Rapporteur on Adequate Housing as a
Component of the Right to an Adequate Standard of Living, and on the Right to
Non-Discrimination in This Context, on Her Mission to Chile (vol. A/HRC/37/5; New

### Page 26

Y ork, 2018). United Nations.
Llanto, Gilberto M. Shelter Finance Strategies for the Poor: Philippines,
Environment and Urbanization 19, no. 2 (2007): 409–23,
h ttps://doi.org/10.1177/0956247807082821.
Loretta Lees , Tom Slater , and Elvin K Wyly , ‘Gentrification’, (London: Routledge,
( 2008).
Manuel B. Aalbers , The Potential for Financialization, Dialogues in Human
Geography 5, no. 2 (2015): 214–19, https://doi.org/10.1177/2043820615588158;
Manuel B. Aalbers , Financial Geographies of Real Estate and the City Financial
G eography Working Paper # 21, 2019, 1–46.
Mills, E. and Hamilton, B. W. Urban Economics. Studies in the Structure of the
U rban Economy (Scott Foresman: Glenview, (1984).
Nicolás Navarrete and Pablo Navarrete , ‘Moving “Away” from Opportunities:
H omeownership and Labor Market’, Working Paper, 2016.
OECD , OECD Employment Outlook 2018, 2018, https://doi.org/10.1787/empl_
o utlook-2018-en.
O ECD, Urban Policy Reviews, Chile 2013, (London: OECD Publishing, (2013)
Pablo Trivelli , Reflexiones en torno a la política Nacional de Desarrollo Urbano,
EURE: Revista Latinoamericana de Estudios urbanos y Territoriales 8, no. 22
(1981): 43–64; Antonio Daher , Neoliberalismo urbano en Chile, Estudios Públicos,
1 990, 281–99.
Paredes, Dusan Paredes y Patricio Aroca , Metodología para Estimar un Indice
Regional de Costo de Vivienda en Chile *, Cuadernos de eConomía 45 (2008):
1 29–43, https://doi.org/10.4067/S0717-68212008000100005.
Paul Ekins y Manfred A. Max-Neef , eds., Real-life Economics: Understanding
W ealth Creation (London and New York: Routledge, (1992).
Paulsen, Alex Paulsen , Negocios inmobiliarios, cambio socioespacial y con-
testación ciudadana en Santiago Poniente. El caso del barrio Yungay: 200–2013,
La ciudad Neoliberal, gentrificación y exclusión en Santiago de Chile, Buenos
A ires, Ciudad de México y Madrid (Santiago: Instituto de Geografía, (2014).
Peter D. Linneman y Isaac F. Megbolugbe , Housing Aordability: Myth or Reality?,
U rban Studies 29 (1992): 369–92, https://doi.org/10.1080/00420989220080491.
Pulso. Construcción advierte riesgo de crisis social por creciente costo de las
v iviendas. La Tercera Pulso, 10 May 2019.
Redding, Stephen Redding , Spatial Income Inequality, Swedish Economic Policy
R eview 12, no. 1 (2005): 29–55.
Rolnik, R. La guerra de los lugares: la colonización de la tierra y la vivienda en la
e ra de las finanzas (Santiago: LOM Ediciones, (2017).
Rolnik, Raquel Rolnik , Late Neoliberalism: The Financialization of Home-
ownership and Housing Rights, International Journal of Urban and Regional
R esearch 37, no. 3 (2013): 1058–66, https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-2427.12062.
Salazar, Gabriel Salazar , La enervante levedad historica de la clase politica civil
(Chile 1900–1973) (Santiago: Debate, (2015); Gabriel Salazar , Historia de la acu-
mulación capitalista en Chile (apuntes de clases) (Santiago: LOM Ediciones,
( 2003).
Salazar, Gabriel , El poder nuestro de cada día. Pobladores. Historia. Acción
p opular constituyente (Santiago: Lom Ediciones, (2016).
Salazar, Gabriel . The “Social Blowout” in Chile: A Historical Overview. Ciper,
2019. https://ciperchile.cl/2019/10/27/el-reventon-social-en-chile-una-mirada-
h istorica/.
Samara, Tony Roshan , Anita Sinha , y Marnie Brady , Putting the “Public” Back in
Aordable Housing: Place and Politics in the Era of Poverty Deconcentration, Cities
35 (2013): 319–26, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cities.2012.10.015.

### Page 27

Santana-Rivas, Daniel , ‘Geografías Regionales y Metropolitanas de La
Financiarización Habitacional En Chile (1982–2015): ¿entre El Sueño de La
Vivienda y La Pesadilla de La Deuda?’, Eure, 2020, https://doi.org/10.4067/S0250-
7 1612020000300163.
S ocovesa, Memoria Anual 2018, Memoria (Santiago: Socovesa, (2018), 57.
Solimano, Andres , Chile and the Neoliberal Trap: The Post-Pinochet Era
( Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, (2012)
Stephen G. Cecchetti , Nelson C. Mark , y Robert Sonora , Price Index
Convergence among United States Cities, International Economic Review 43, no. 4
( 2002): 1081–99.
Stephens, Carolyn , Revisiting Urban Health and Social Inequalities: The Devil is in
the Detail and the Solution is in All of Us, Environment and Urbanization 23, no. 1
( 2011): 37, https://doi.org/10.1177/0956247811398588.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. The Price of Inequality: How Today’s Divided Society Endangers
O ur Future, 1st ed (New York: W.W. Norton & Co, (2012)
Stone, Michael E. Housing Policy Debate What is Housing Aordability? The Case
for the Residual Income Approach, Housing Policy Debate 17 (2010): 37–41,
h ttps://doi.org/10.1080/10511482.2006.9521564
Sverdlik, Alice , Ill-health and Poverty: A Literature Review on Health in Informal
Settlements, Environment and Urbanization 23, no. 1 (2011): 123–55,
h ttps://doi.org/10.1177/0956247811398604.
Thünen, J. H. Von . Der Isolierte Staat (The Isolated State) (Hamburg: Perthes,
( 1826). In: https://doi.org/Cited By (since 1996) 13rExport Date 3 February 2012.
Trivelli, P. Elementos teóricos para el análisis de una nueva política de desarrollo
u rbano (Santiago de Chile: Institute of Urban Development Planning, (1981).
Trivelli, Pablo . (2017). Characterisation of areas with potential for densification in
p ericentral districts of Santiago. Conference at CEDEUS.
Truffello, Ricardo & Rodrigo Hidalgo , Policentrismo en el Área Metropolitana de
Santiago de Chile: reestructuración comercial, movilidad y tipificación de
subcentros, EURE (Santiago) 41, no. 122 (2015): 49–73,
h ttps://doi.org/10.4067/S0250-71612015000100003.
Universidad Alberto Hurtado , Encuesta Chile Dice (Hurtado: Universidad Alberto
H urtado, (2017).
Valencia, Marco . The Free Market City. Diseño Urbano & Paisaje Magazine 3, no.
7 (2006).
Vekemans, Roger , Jorge Giusti , and Ismael Silva , Marginalidad, Promoción
Popular e Integración Latinoamericana, ed. DESAL, Ediciones (Buenos Aires,
1 970).
Vergara Perucich, F. and Boano, C. Under Scarcity, is Half a House Enough?
Reflections on Alejandro Aravena’s Pritzker. Architecture Review 21, no. 31
( 2016): 37–46. En: doi:10.5354/0719-5427.2016.42516
Vergara Perucich, Francisco . Acts of Dissent as Democratising Urbanism: Political
S pace in Santiago de Chile. Urbe. Revista Brasileira de Gestão Urbana 11 (2019).
Vergara-Perucich, F. and Aguirre-Núñez, C. Inversionistification in Latin America:
Problematising the Market (2019). of renting for the Chilean case. Habitat y
S ociedad 1(12), pp. 1–20.
Vergara-Perucich, Francisco . Urban Design Under Neoliberalism: Theorising from
S antiago (Oxon and New York: Routledge, (2019)
Vergara-Perucich, José Francisco , Juan Correa-Parra , y Carlos Aguirre-Nuñez ,
The Spatial Correlation between the Spread of Covid-19 and Vulnerable Urban
Areas in Santiago de Chile, Critical Housing Analysis 7, no. 2 (2020): 21–35,
https://doi.org/10.13060/23362839.2020.7.2.512.

### Page 28

Vergara-Perucich, Jose Francisco & Camillo Boano , Vida urbana neoliberal:
estudio de factores de jerarquización y fragmentación contra el derecho a la
ciudad en Chile, Revista de Direito da Cidade 11, no. 3 (2019): 426–52,
h ttps://doi.org/10.12957/rdc.2019.38541.
Vergara-Perucich, José Francisco . Determinantes urbanos del precio de la
v ivienda en Chile: una exploración estadística, Urbano (2021): 40–51.
Vergara-Perucich, José-Francisco ¿Qué tan caro es vivir en las capitales
regionales? La necesidad de descentralizar las mediciones sobre el costo de vida
en Chile, en El nuevo orden regional. Construcción Social y Gobernanza del
Territorio, ed. Verónica Fuentes, Egon Montecinos, y Pedro Güell, 1st ed (Valdivia:
U niversidad Austral de Chile, (2020), 145–58.
Vergara-Perucich, José-Francisco , Juan Correa , and Carlos Aguirre-Núñez ,
Atlas de Indicadores Espaciales de Vulnerabilidad Ante El COVID-19 En Chile
( San- tiago: Centro Producción del Espacio, (2020).
Vergara-Perucich, José Francisco & Aguirre-Nuñez , , Housing Prices in
Unregulated Markets: Study on Verticalised Dwellings in Santiago de Chile,
B uildings 10, no. 1 (2019): 6. https://doi.org/10.3390/buildings10010006.
Vergara, Jorge Eduardo , Verticalización. la edificación en altura en la región
m etropolitana de Santiago (1990–2014), Revista INVI 32, no. 90 (2017): 9–49.
W arren, E. , and Warren-Tyagi, A. All Your Worth (New York: Free Press, (2005).
Winn, Peter , “No Miracle for Us”: The Textile Industry in the Pinochet Era,
1973–1998, en Victims of the Chilean Miracle: Workers and Neoliberalism in the
P inochet Era, 1973–2002, 2004, https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.00308-15.
Zizek, Han and Butler in: Pablo (editor) Amadeo, Sopa de Wuhan. Pensamiento
Contemporáneo En Tiempo de Pandemias, ed. Pablo Amadeo (Santiago: ASPO
( Aislamiento Social Preventivo y Obligatorio), n.d.).

